[14:40]

I would like to start the very first session of the International Development
Select Committee. It is a new committee that we've got here for this new
parliament. And it is my great honor that our very first witness is Professor
Nizam Mamode, who is a professor of transplant surgery. But Nizam, you're
here in front of us because you have recently returned from Gaza, and doing
some work in the hospitals over there. We really appreciate you coming and
speaking to us today. It's very difficult to get firsthand testimony,
obviously, about what's going on in Gaza at the moment. So thank you for
coming and sharing your experiences. I wonder if you could properly introduce
yourself, and what you're actually doing out there, and when you came back.

[15:28]

Yes, so I'm no longer a professor of transplant surgery. I retired from the
NHS a couple of years ago, and I've spent my time doing work overseas. So I
had a month in Gaza, mid August and mid September, working in Nasser hospital
with medical aid for Palestinians. And I'm happy to tell you about my
experiences there.

[15:52]

Please, tell us, when did you go? Why did you go?

[15:56]

Why did I go? Because I thought I had the skill set that could help. When I
was sitting in the convoy, going in across the border, I did have second thoughts,
but it was too late then to get out of the convoy. And I think when we crossed
the border, the first thing was really a complete sense of shock.

[16:22]

What did you see? What did you smell?

[16:24]

You see a landscape that looks as though, it reminded me of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. Devastation, buildings reduced to rubble for miles around, as far as
you can see. Nothing growing. No people, a few looters here and there, but
nothing. You drive through that for about 20 minutes and then you get to the
central part of southern Gaza, which was designated the green zone. I can't
bring myself to call it the safe zone or humanitarian zone, because it was
neither. That green zone houses about 1.3 million people.

[17:08]

What sort of area is that?

[17:09]

It's probably about the size of the city of London. You can walk across it
fairly easily if it was safe to do so. A large part of it comprises of tents.
When I say tents, some of those are proper tents. Many of them are just pieces
of carpet and plastic stuck onto sticks. These are in the middle of the road,
side of the road, every possible space. There's no running water, no
sanitation, no electricity obviously. People are having to roll those up and
move on at very, very short notice. Time and time again, most people have moved
six or seven times.

[17:58]

What is the sound, smell?

[18:02]

Well the sound is mainly of two things. One is drones. So there's constant
drones. The drones existed before October last year. It's been a feature of
Palestinian life for some time. But now the drones inspire fear, I think, and
they inspire fear in me. When I used to debate about sleeping outside on the
stairs, or inside in this very crowded hot room, part of that decision was
whether the drones had the ability to pick me off when I was on the stairs.

[18:40]

To identify you?

Sorry?

Identify you.

[18:43]

No, shoot me. So that's what they do. Those drones are surveillance drones,
but they are also drones that shoot people regularly. And I can tell you more
about some of the people I've operated on who experienced that. So you have
this constant whine, which is very psychologically very affecting because it
represents danger and it's constantly there. And the other sound that you hear
are bombs, which were going off every hour or two throughout the month that I
was there. And we spent the whole month in the hospital. We deemed it not
safe to travel. And we were aware that there was a curfew, so we wanted to be
in the hospital. If casualties arrived at night, we did have a guest house.
We didn't want to stay there, partly because of the travel, but also because
one of the mapped guest houses had been bombed in January of this year. So we
stayed in the hospital and a missile strike, or an artillery shell would
explode in the vicinity, and the whole building would shake. Windows would
rattle. You would look out the window or run outside to see how close it was.
It was a constant feature of life. We felt we were relatively safe because we
thought it's unlikely there'll be a direct strike on the hospital. But for
those 1.3, 1.4 million people in that green zone, they were constantly being
bombed day and night.

[20:31]

And what I think I found particularly disturbing was that a bomb would drop
maybe on a crowded, tainted area, and then the drones would come down and...
(holding back tears)

Please take your time. We're incredibly grateful that you're making the time
to be here today. And I can only imagine just how it has impacted you and will
continue to impact you. And I feel because you can't unsee what you've seen.
But being able to share that with us really helps us hold legislators
particularly to account. So we do appreciate the time that you're making for
us today. Thank you.

[21:17]

The drones would come down and pick off civilians' children. And we had
description after description. This is not an occasional thing. This was day
after day after day operating on children who would say, I was lying on the
ground after a bomb had dropped and this quadcopter came down and hovered over
me and shot me. And that's clearly a deliberate act and it was a persistent
act, persistent targeting of civilians day after day. We had one or two mass
casualty incidents every day. That meant 10 to 20 dead, 20 to 40 seriously
injured. Now a hospital like Guy's where I used to work, Guy's and St Thomas's
might get one or two a year. We had one or two a day. And 60 to 70% of the
people who were treated were women and children.

[22:17]

I'm sorry to do this. Draw you a little. You say children. I wonder if you
could tell us sort of the ages of the children. And you say that they said
that they were lying on the ground from a bomb shock. Do you believe them?

[22:34]

Oh, yeah. Absolutely. I mean, a seven-year-old is not going to make up a story.
We're talking little children, not late teens. Well, the majority of the
children who were casualties were young children. But we had casualties in
their teens. We had women in their 30s. And it was a very consistent story.
And the story would be given as soon as they came into the emergency
department. So I have absolutely no reason to doubt this. And the bullets that
the drones fire are these small cuboid pellets. And I fished a number of those
out of the abdomen of small children. I think the youngest I operated on was a
three-year-old who had a major injury to the artery in her neck. And we used
the last shunt, which is a device you use to bypass the artery in the neck.
Keep supplying blood to the brain. We used the last one in the hospital. And
because those kinds of things are just not available. She died about three or
four days later from infection.

[24:02]

Do you believe it was deliberate targeting?

[24:04]

Absolutely. No, absolutely no question in my mind. It's been the experience
of so many health care workers who've documented it time and time and time
again. But my personal experience and those of my colleagues was, this was
clearly persistent deliberate targeting of civilians. And I've worked in a
number of conflict zones in different parts of the world. I was there at the
time the Rwandan genocide. I've never seen anything on this scale ever. And
that was also the view of all the experienced colleagues that I worked with.
One of the surgeons in my team had been to Ukraine five times and said, this is
10 times worse. Normally in a conflict zone, you would have a front line, have
fighting going on between two sets of forces and you might get some civilians
injured in that exchange. There doesn't seem to be a front line. There just
seems to be 1.4 million people trapped. They can't leave. And having bombs
dropped on them on a daily basis and then drones coming in and shooting them.
And there's plenty of evidence out there from Israeli soldiers that that's
what's going on. But we saw it. We saw the results of it.

[25:33]

Thank you. Laura.

[25:36]

Laura: You talked about a child dying of an infection that was caught. We know that
supplies getting in are extremely limited, less now than they have been in the
past. Can you talk a bit about the challenges that you face because of the lack
of supplies? How does that manifest itself when you're trying to do your
medical work?

[25:59]

Yeah. So I remember one Saturday night operating on an eight year old who was
bleeding to death and I asked for a swab. And they said, no more swabs.
(holding back tears)

[26:17]

We had operations being done with no sterile gloves, no sterile drapes, at
various points. We had lack of basic equipment. I did amputations on people who
just had to take paracetamol after the operation as pain relief. That medical
aid was sitting at the border and not being allowed in. We were not allowed to
take any medical equipment, except for personal use. So I was asked could I
bring thyroid medication for some people? Couldn't take it in. That's a
deliberate policy. And that's changed because I know that teams earlier in the
year have been able to take some medical equipment in. So again, that seems to
me to be a deliberate restriction of medical supplies. And basic things like
soap, shampoo, that's not being allowed in. I saw, I don't know how many wounds
with maggots in. One of my colleagues took maggots out of a child's throat in
intensive care. There were flies in the operating theater, landing in the
wounds. It was appalling, and that's a deliberate choice. It's not an accident.

[27:44]

In light of those challenges, how did you attempt to manage sterilization?

[27:46]

You just do the best you can, but you know, a large number of our patients,
perhaps the majority I don't know, would survive the operation and die of
infections afterwards. And I think, you know, there was another, there was a
doctor in his 30s, who worked in intensive care in the hospital. He got
hepatitis A, which is a disease of poor hygiene. It's a disease for which
there's a vaccination. I've been vaccinated. He didn't have access to the
vaccine. He became unwell. He became a patient of his own ITU. He didn't
have the treatment that he could have had in a proper environment. And he died
in his own ITU. And we asked for him to be evacuated, but he wasn't.

[28:39]

Thank you. It sounds medieval, what you're describing.

Yes, undoubtedly. I mean, and remember that Nasser Hospital, at the time that I
was there, was probably the best hospital in Gaza. Most other hospitals did
not have the facilities and the equipment that Nasser had. And Nasser was barely
functioning as a hospital. And was being run by staff, many of whom had very,
very little experience, because so many medical staff have been detained, been
killed. Some have left when they were able to leave. So intensive care, for
example, was run basically by general practitioners who'd had very minimal
training. So the cost in life and in suffering from that side of things is
very substantial, because you don't have the equipment, you don't have the
staff, you don't have the facilities. And even getting access to the hospital.
An ambulance was shot while I was there. Several bullet holes in the
windscreen while it was going to pick up. Casualties, I think it's something
like 163 or more documented examples of ambulances being targeted. So many
people never got an ambulance. People would carry casualties in. Sometimes
bring them in on donkey carts. And when a mass casualty incident happened,
we'd have the whole emergency department full. People would be lying on the
floor in pools of blood. And it would be a case of trying to decide who was
alive, who was alive and might survive with some treatment, and who could wait
a bit. And that was pretty much every day. And that's been going on for a
very long time now.

[30:58]

The information you're giving is throwing us, but we're glad that you're giving
it to us. Alice?

[31:08]

Alice: Yeah, thank you. It's very powerful testimony. You mentioned at the beginning
that about 60%, I think, of the people you were saying were women and children.
Can you just expand a little bit more on the kind of effects that you were
seeing on women and children? Presumably, there would be pregnant women coming
in, for example. Just to talk about some of the challenges that you were
seeing, particularly when it comes to those two groups of vulnerable people.

[31:34]

Yeah, I mean, I wouldn't want to be pregnant in Gaza at the moment. We didn't
deal directly with women giving birth. That was dealt with elsewhere, so we
didn't have experience of that. But you would have people with blast injuries,
abdominal injuries, chest injuries, limbs blown off, head injuries. We saw a
number of children with sniper injuries to the head, single shot to the head,
no other injuries. So clearly, deliberately targeted by Israeli snipers. And
yeah, that was day after day.

[32:27]

Maybe just ask a follow-up question in terms of the horrendous things you're
describing, drone targeting snipers, as you just mentioned. How was that kind
of -- you In terms of what you were seeing happening, was there a way to bring
some of that together, in the same way that you're sharing this evidence with
us here now? Or was that shared back on the ground in different ways with
different people?

[32:56]

Do you mean with people in Gaza?

Yeah.

Do you mean how is it documented?

Yeah, how is it documented, if it's possible to do that.

[33:02]

It's not really. I mean the emergency department is chaos most of the time.
There are no medical notes anymore. There would be little scraps of paper.
People would write something on saying, had an amputation, come back in a week
on discharge. That was the extent. There were, I think they documented the
admissions, but collecting detailed statistics about causes of particular
trauma is difficult. I think, sorry just to say one other thing, I mean I
think as you probably know, there's been a letter from 32 doctors and nurses
from the UK who wrote to the Prime Minister back in September. They'd all worked
in Gaza. Some of them overlapped with me. And 99 in the US who wrote to Biden
in October, saying exactly the same things. This is not a surprise. This is
something that senior politicians I'm sure are well aware of.

[34:25]

Additional question on this. What was the balance that you were seeing between
people whose injuries and suffering was caused directly by the conflict, eg
bullets, bombs, shrapnel and so on, versus disease, hunger and other types of
illness, you know, affected by living in those conditions?

[34:47]

So there were a lot of people with those problems as a surgeon, I only kind of
saw them peripherally coming through. So we would, on a daily basis, there
would be several people coming to the emergency department, for example, with
diabetic ketoacidosis. So these would be diabetics who didn't have access to
insulin. And then they would develop a diabetic coma. So that's, you have to
go back to the 30s and 40s in this country for that to happen. Insulin needs
to be kept in a fridge if you're living in a tent. How do you store it? How do
you even get hold of it? So there were lots of those examples. Colleagues who
were working in primary care were describing huge amounts of infectious
disease, particularly amongst children. We certainly saw malnourished children.

[35:43]

And I think that's just getting worse and worse and worse now. And then, of
course, there are all the other normal conditions, if you like. So we came
across people with bowel cancer and they got an operation, but it wasn't a
curative operation, because there's no chemotherapy, no radiotherapy. So all
the kind of ancillary services that existed before the war, they had some very
good hospitals with very good facilities and very good staff. They were all
gone, they'd been destroyed. So there's a huge uncounted cost to the war. And
there was a paper at the Lancet in July estimating because of that both the
casualties that had been counted, those that were likely to be under the
rubble, and all of those who were dying from other diseases as a result of the
war, they estimated conservatively 186,000 dead. That was in those figures up
to June. So, to my mind, it's over 200,000 now.

[36:51]

Okay.

You talked about colleagues who had been detained and killed. Can you give us
an idea of how many colleagues you were working amongst in the hospital?

The colleagues I was working with? Do you mean Palestinian colleagues?

Yes, local colleagues.

Well there were quite a few, I would have to guess, there's probably about
20-25 doctors in the hospital, maybe more, I don't know. But there were many,
many more before the war. And many of the doctors I was working with had been
in the north and had fled the north and were now making up the numbers in the
south.

[37:40]

You also talked about ambulances being targeted. Did you feel safe?

Well, I felt relatively safe in the sense that I thought it was unlikely they'd
drop a 2,000 pound bomb directly on the hospital. But we were worried about
drones, couldn't leave the hospital, and travelling in and out was probably the
most nerve-wracking thing. So we travelled in and out on a UN convoy of
armoured vehicles. That's been shot at five times by the Israelis. These are
convoys that are very carefully organised so they follow a predetermined route
given to them by the Israeli army. There's a radio check at the start before
they leave, during the journey and at the end. So the Israeli army know that
they're there and where they are. And despite that, five times, including while
we were there, they've been shot at. So my biggest fear while I was there was
being killed by the Israelis.

[38:47]

The convoys that were shot at, was this a rogue sniper?

No, this is the Israeli army coming up as a unit and deliberately shooting.

The UN convoy?

[39:04]

Yes, so the last one, when I was there, I think it would have been about the
end of August, was reported. Some WHO staff. These are armoured vehicles, so
you can see I think four, five bullet marks in the window. Just where someone
would have been sitting. We were told, given very clear instructions, the doors
are going to be locked when you set off. Do not unlock the doors if the Israeli
army shoot at you and order you out. Do not get out of the vehicle. This is a
UN convoy. It's got UN big letters on the side. And it carries in twice a week.
It carries about 30 to 40 aid workers from different organisations in and out.
A huge number of aid workers have been targeted, and that's well documented.
And again, to my mind, that's a deliberate...

[40:10]

Could I ask you a question? Sorry, the drone thing, especially. When they're
shooting at people, these are single shots or are they machine guns? I mean,
are they targeting individual people with a one-off shot? How does it happen?

[40:32]

Yeah, so, luckily I never was anywhere near a drone firing. So I can only
comment on what we saw when people came in. So, we would see people with
sometimes a single entry point, sometimes two or three. What we did see on one
or two occasions was a very disturbing pattern where there'd be three or four
shots here, three or four shots here and again in the groin. And that, we all
thought, was prima facie evidence of an autonomous drone or a semi-autonomous
drone because a human operator would not be able to fire with that degree of
accuracy that quickly. And there is some documentation that those were going
to be used as reported in Haaretz back in April. So that was particularly
disturbing. But most of the drone injuries we saw were one, two, sometimes
three shots. And these pellets were in a way more destructive than bullets
because if you're shot in the chest with a bullet, if it misses your heart,
goes on the other side, it can go through your lung and out the back. You'll
probably survive, but with the drone pellets what I found was they would go in
and they would bounce around. So they would cause multiple injuries. So I had
a seven year old boy, the one I described earlier, who gave a very clear
description. He had an entry point here. He came in with his stomach hanging
out of his chest. He had an injury to his liver, spleen. (holding back tears)

[42:25]

Bow, arteries. So quite extensive destruction from a single entry point. And he
survived that and went out a week later. Whether he's still alive, I don't
know.

[42:43]

Thank you for trying. Gordon.

[42:47]

Thank you very much, Nizam, for coming in front of the committee. It's
incredibly valuable to hear your testimony. I have to say in the four months
I've been an MP, I don't think I've heard anything as harrowing as what you're
describing. So I really appreciate you coming in front of us. I wondered, and
I realise this is a difficult question to answer, if you could try and give an
estimation of how many lives could be saved, protected by aid that is currently
sitting at the border crossing. You know, what is the difference on the ground
you feel that can make with aid that is literally being spent?

[43:21]

It would make a huge difference, huge difference. I mean, I've never been in a
conflict area where medical aid has been restricted to that extent. I mean, you
know, it's not allowing supplies in, bombing healthcare facilities, attacking
ambulances, killing healthcare workers. If all of that didn't happen, then
tens of thousands of lives would be saved. And I would think that any army that
is engaged in a war has a responsibility to the civilian population on both
sides. And I'm seeing the opposite there.

[44:08]

If I could ask a follow-up question on that. From your experience and your
colleagues' experience working in other conflict zones, how different is this
to, you gave even the example of Ukraine, how different is it from a normal
conflict zone in terms of the medical?

[44:20]

Completely, completely different in every respect. And, you know, I think that
was a recurring theme from everybody, from people working for the UN, WHO,
doctors, everybody. The International Committee, the Red Cross were there, the
field hospital.  Most of the time in a conflict zone, the civilian population
can move, they can get away from it. They may have to walk a long distance.
They may have to suffer doing that. But, you know, it's the equivalent of just
putting a blockade around the city of London, saying you can't leave and then
dropping bombs month after month and then closing down all the healthcare
facilities.  That's what's happening. And it's astonishing that it's
continuing. I mean, we all found that it was beyond belief that this could
continue.

[45:22]

Do you regard what you saw as genocide?

[45:26]

I'm not an international human rights lawyer, so I can't talk about the
absolute definitions. But it's difficult to find another word for it, given
what we've seen. And I certainly think that the Palestinian people feel that
that's what's happening to them and there's a sense of resignation, that
they're all just waiting to die with no chance of escape.  So, in a word, yes.

[45:58]

The Israelis would say that they're dropping leaflets warning people to move to
different areas. So it's not targeted at civilians. What are your thoughts on
that?

[46:08]

Well, I think there's two things. First of all, the green zone supposedly
they're not targeting. So most of our casualties were from the green zone. And
many of them had no evacuation, no warning at all. A bomb would just drop.  We
had a vehicle blown up five metres from the Emergency Department in the main
street.  We certainly didn't get any warning. And if I'd been crossing the road
to buy something, that would have been the end of me.  In terms of evacuation
orders, the way it works is they normally send a message out on mobile phones
to all the mobile phones, saying, "Area number, whatever, evacuation order." So
if you have a mobile phone and if it's charged and working, which is not that
easy if you're in a tent, then you might have a chance.  But the bombing
typically would start sometimes minutes, sometimes hours. So I had one of the
Palestinian doctors who worked very closely with me. We were on a ward run one
morning.  And he suddenly looked at his phone and said, "I've got to go." And
he ran out the hospital.  He ran to find the tent where his wife, his two young
children, the youngest was one and a half, and his father were living. And they
had to pack up the tent and walk for miles to find somewhere else, all the
while thinking at any moment we may have a bomb dropped on us.  And that's the
day-to-day reality of life for all those people.

[47:54]

You talked about this day-to-day reality. You've talked about children being
targeted and health care workers being killed. And you talked about a sense of
resignation that, you know, civilian will think they will die.  Can you give us
a sense of what they think about the international community? Or do they think
at all about what we could do?

[48:17]

Well, they were very pleased to hear that I'd spoken to some MPs last week when
I messaged the colleagues there and said, "This is what I'm doing." And I said,
"Don't know if it'll make much difference." And they said, "Well, small steps."
I think they feel abandoned by the international community. They feel, some of
them, still hope that something might happen.  And I think they appreciated
hugely the fact that people were coming to help them and stand by them. That
was one of the main reasons for going.

[49:05]

Thank you. Nizam, thank you for coming and speaking to us today. And thanks for
having the strength to share your experiences as well. I know how difficult it
must be. Going back to the sort of points around targeting, was there a threat
that the Israeli Defence Force was seeing? Was Hamas in the community? Could
you see where it was, or…?

[49:24]

Yes, I'm laughing because this was the question I asked when I got there. "Is
Hamas in the hospital? Have they been in the hospital?" And they just laughed
at me. And they said, "There is no Hamas. There's a few fighters hiding in
tunnels. There's no Hamas. There never was any Hamas in the hospital. Everybody
hates Hamas." And we never saw any evidence in the street, in the hospital. As
I said, I've been in conflict zones before. Normally, if fighters come in, they
come in with guns. They come in with their friends with guns. We never saw any
of that. We were allowed to go wherever we wanted in the hospital. There might
have been a tunnel underneath, who knows. But if Hamas were coming and going in
the hospital, it would have been fairly evident, and I think they would have
been probably kicked out by the people that worked there. I remember they
described, with ironic laughter, they described one of their colleagues when
Nassau Hospital was attacked by the Israelis in February, and they killed a
number of staff, put them in a mass grave along with a number of patients.
That's well documented. But they described one of their colleagues who was
taken away, detained along with a number of others, who was killed in
detention. And they said, "Well, he was an atheist and he hated Hamas, and he
was before the war. He was very vociferous about those things. He just thought
Islam was stupid, and he thought Hamas was stupid, and they took him away and
killed him." That's what's going on. It's not, as far as I can see, it doesn't
matter who you are in Gaza. If you're Palestinian, you're a target.

[51:21]

David and then Noah.

[51:25]

Thank you, Professor. As follows on from what Laura was asking you and what
Gordon was asking you, but on the subject of medical supplies, what would you
say in the circumstances are the highest need, the highest priority in terms of
the particular types of medical supplies that need to get in at this point?

[51:43]

Well, basic medical supplies, so adequate things like course swabs, gowns,
gloves, antibiotics, pain killers, all those basic things. Those are absolutely
essential. But beyond that, you need all of the other ancillary things.  You
need catheters to put into people. You need specialist imaging techniques and
so on.  I've been a transplant surgeon for most of my career, so I know quite a
bit about dialysis. I used to look every morning on the balcony where our
accommodation was in the hospital, I would look across to a building which had
been the new dialysis center built by Kuwaitis, as I understand it.  And you
can see that building is 100 meters away, burnt out. No shell damage, no bullet
holes, there was no fight, no firefight there. The Israelis went in and burnt
it out.  So now they have six or seven dialysis machines essentially for the
whole of Southern Gaza. And if you have kidney failure and you don't have
dialysis, you die. So to my mind, that's just not acceptable.

[53:12]

Thank you, Nizam, for sharing those really harrowing experiences. Do you have a
sense on the point of being targeted as medical professionals?  And you spoke
about the information that the defense forces have. What in your mind, did you
ever get a sense of the motivation behind some of these attacks, or is that far
away and distant for you?

[53:45]

Well, in terms of targeting foreign aid workers, so for example, bombing of the
Map guest house in January, one of the surgeons who was with me was there at
the time, and a missile landed just within the grounds in front of the house at
6 a.m. in the morning.  Some people were injured, luckily nobody was killed.
All of those guest houses are in the Israeli Army's computers. They are
designated as safe houses.  So my assumption is that that is a deliberate
attack and that the aim behind it is to discourage aid workers from coming. And
I think it's the same as the shooting at the UN convoys.  In terms of attacking
hospitals and ambulances and so on, to my mind it can't be anything other than
collective punishment.  It's just a consistent attempt to essentially wipe out
a large part of the population.  And I think the other theme that comes through
again and again when you talk to people is the humiliation, the aggression. So
I was operating on one young girl one night who died not long afterwards and I
can't even begin to describe her injuries.  But when I'd finished operating on
her, an ophthalmologist was trying to take out her left eye which was just
pulp.  And he was a lovely, gentle man, maybe five years older than me. And
while he was working he was just saying, "Yeah, when they came in February they
got all of us who were still here, they put our hands behind our backs, tied
them up, put a hood over our heads, made us stand for ten hours, beat us,
cursed us in Arabic, humiliated us, and then some were taken away, some were
killed, some were detained, some were released." We had a medical student. He
worked with us who described how the women had all been lined up and been told
to strip down to their underwear.  And made to stand for hours like that, which
is deeply, deeply humiliating, particularly in that culture.  And then when
they told her she could go they wouldn't give her her clothes back. So she had
to run through the streets like that.  Which for her was extremely traumatic.
So there's a consistent theme of attack, humiliation, aggression.  Against
people who were simply trying to do their job, to try and help people in the
worst possible circumstances.

[57:07]

You said they did this to the medics. Who?

[57:11]

The Israeli army. Yeah.

[57:15]

All right, Laura, last question.

You were in a hospital, I think you said. Yes.  The situation in North Gaza is
getting a lot of attention now, more attention now for how awful it is.  Did
you have any contact with medical professionals trying to work in the north of
the country?

[57:37]

No, only in the sense that I think three of, there was a group of Jordanian
doctors sharing the accommodation with us.  And three of them said we're going
to try and get into the north.  And they got turned back at the, essentially a
border now.  And weren't allowed in. That was in August when things were
nothing like they are now.

[58:06]

Very last question.

Yes, just in terms of going back to children and the effects on children.  In
terms of medical evacuations of children and other conflicts you have seen that
in terms of children being able to be sent elsewhere for treatment.  Did you,
was that something that you were advocating for in the hospital you were
working on?  Did you see it happen and if it didn't, do you think that is
something that could be pushed further?

[58:27]

I don't think it's a solution. So there are a tiny, tiny number of people who
get evacuated for medical care.  And if you were to do it in terms of need it
would be thousands going every month.  Literally. Because what's not picked up
by a lot of the statistics is children who have had both legs blown off.  You
know, people who have got ongoing problems as a result.  When I left the WHO
was trying to construct a tented area within the hospital grounds just to deal
with constructing prosthetic limbs for people who lost limbs in the war.  You
know, it's a huge, huge number.  And of course, you know, one of the acronyms
that is now used in Gaza is Wounded Child Most Surviving Family.  You know, you
have so many children who come in as a result of a missile strike and all their
relatives have been killed.  And then eventually somebody pitches up and says
I'm a cousin.  You know, I managed to come from a different part of Gaza.  But
you know, what's happening to the children is appalling.

[1:00:00]

I cannot tell you my gratitude and the gratitude of the committee for both you
coming here today but for the work that you've done.  And if you could express
our deep thanks to your colleagues who are doing the same work day in, day out,
we would be very grateful.  And please assure them that you have spoken to us,
but we have also heard and we would do all that we can to act on your very
profound testimony.  We'll make sure that it's heard for everybody that is in a
position to make changes on this horrific situation that you've described so
eloquently to us.  Thank you so much for your time. I do appreciate it.

Thank you.

Thank you very much.

[1:00:44]

Can I ask the next panel members to please step forward and could I also ask
those that are online if they could join us and can we just check that the
sound is working?  We can't currently see those that are online.  If they could
come up on our screens, please. But while we're waiting for our colleagues
online, if I could say hello to Sam Rose and Rohan Talbot.  Rohan, you've been
in front of us before.  So thank you very much for coming back and it's quite
useful to have you on record from, I think it was nine months ago.

It was January. Yeah.

..to look at how the situation has changed in that time. While we're waiting
for our colleagues to join us remotely, Sam, if I could ask both you and Rohan
to introduce yourselves and the organisations that you're representing today,
please. Sam.

[1:01:46]

Good afternoon and thanks for the opportunity to brief you today. I'm here
representing UNRWA, United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East.

[1:01:59]

Could I ask you, what does UNRWA actually do?

[1:02:02]

Yeah, UNRWA provides education, healthcare, social services, humanitarian aid
for 6 million Palestine refugees and other persons registered with UNRWA. In
Gaza, West Bank, Lebanon, Syria, and Jordan, has operated for 75 years,
educated over the course of that time over 2.5 million children who themselves
have gone on to educate much of the rest of the Middle East, particularly the
Gulf has produced tens of thousands of doctors, healthcare workers,
professionals, and it's mandated to continue providing services to Palestine
refugees and protection until such a time as there is a just lasting and
comprehensive solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

[1:02:50]

I quite often describe them as a local authority, is that the right description
or how would you sum it up?

[1:02:58]

I think it probably is, with all the kind of foibles that come with being a
local authority. In terms of the types of services that we provide, we're
running an education system, a health system. We don't run the refugee camps
but we provide municipal-type services inside those camps. I think the one...

[1:03:19]

Is that things like sewage and that kind of stuff?

Sorry?

Sewage?

Sewage, water purification, water supply, drainage, that type of thing, social
services, we've got hundreds of social workers, nurses, sanitation, labourers,
etc. I think the one key difference between UNRWA and a local authority, at
least to a degree, is that we don't generate revenue on the back of the
services that we provide. We're reliant on voluntary contributions from donors
who are primarily the member states of the United Nations.

[1:03:51]

Thank you. And I'm very pleased that we're joined by our colleagues Amina and
Nibral. Nibral, you also came and spoke to us, I think it was in January. So
thank you very much. If I can turn to you both in a moment, but Rohan, could
you just tell us who you are and the organisation you're representing today?

[1:04:08]

>> Yes, of course. Thank you very much for inviting me back. I wish it wasn't necessary,
to be perfectly honest, but I appreciate the opportunity to share some updates. My name
is Rohan Talbot. I'm the Director of Advocacy and Campaigns at Medical Aid for Palestinians.
For those of you who don't know MAPS work, we are a humanitarian relief and development
agency that began actually working in Lebanon 40 years ago this year, supporting Palestinian
refugees and has since gone on to work, obviously, in the occupied Palestinian territory. We
have colleagues who are operating and working on the ground, Palestinian colleagues in Gaza,
as well as the West Bank in Lebanon, who are currently, of course, largely engaged in humanitarian
relief operations. >> Thank you. Amina, could I turn to you? I
wonder if you could introduce yourself and the organisation that you're working for.
Thank you very much for joining us today. It looks much better weathered with you than
where we are. >> Thank you so much for having me. My name
is Amina, and I am an Associate Disability Rights Director at Human Rights Watch. Human
Rights Watch is an international non-governmental organisation that monitors human rights development
in more than 100 countries around the world, including Israel and Palestine. We have a
dedicated division working specifically on the rights of persons with disabilities. That's
where I work. >> Thank you very much. And Nabaral, thank
you so much for joining us today. I wonder if you can tell us a little about yourself
and the organisation you're representing. >> Good evening, everyone. Thanks for having
me. The Palestine Red Crescent is the lead emergency medical service provider in the
occupied Palestinian territory. We provide healthcare services through our hospitals,
medical points and even field hospitals in the Gaza Strip. We also provide emergency
medical services across the Gaza Strip in addition to distributing humanitarian aid,
establishing shelters for the internally displaced community, and also providing psychosocial
support for the children and women impacted by the ongoing war. This is in addition to
other rehabilitation services, working with the people with disabilities and also doing
some community work to raise the awareness of the internally displaced communities, how
to protect themselves from infectious diseases and other emergency issues.
>> Thank you so much. We've got a series of questions that different committee members
are going to ask to you individually. We've broken it up into themes. But also I'm very
aware that each of you may well have things you want to add to a question that wasn't
directed at you. So in which case just sort of raise your hand and we'll bring you in
if we possibly can. But the first question is from Monica.
>> Thank you, and thank you for coming in today. This is one for you, Sam. Can we go
back to January 2024 and the effects of the withdrawal from major countries following
the allegations of Stavka Spirovich Hamas? What were the long term, or what will be the
long term effects of that? >> Absolutely. I mean, I believe there were
around 19 countries that suspended funding when the allegations were announced by the
Israeli government, amongst them the UK, of course. Now over a period of several weeks
and months, all governments apart from one, that government being the US, did restore
and did resume funding. So in terms of overall support, that support, political coming along
with the financial was restored from all but one of the donors. Of course the one donor
that didn't resolve funding is by far and was largest donor. The US typically in any
kind of quote unquote normal year would provide about 30% of any funding that comes to run
UNRWA's programs. We typically spend between $1 billion and $1.5 billion a year. This is
across all our five fields of operation. So any organization that loses that amount of
money, it's a shock. It's a shock both in terms of our ability to manage and plan, given
the kind of uncertainty of the horizon. Both in terms of the supplies that we have to buy,
to assist a population that remains and was also at that time on the verge of famine.
It also creates difficulties in terms of our ability to plan for staffing and staff salaries
because the bulk of what UNRWA does in all other fields of operations is funded through
staff. 80% of what we do are staff salaries. And if we don't know where the money is coming
from from one month to the next, it makes it very difficult to plan, but also to manage
the disquiet and the uncertainty amongst our workforce. So it created all sorts of difficulties.
Actually in Gaza, it meant that money that was assigned or budgeted for UNRWA found its
way into other organizations' pockets, which is good in terms of the humanitarian community's
ability to meet the needs of the population in Gaza. But it also led to concerns that UNRWA
was being instrumentalized and that UNRWA's role was being undermined, and that providing
this aid through other organizations wasn't always the most efficient way to meet the
life-saving needs of the population. In terms of the staff that you said, the bulk of your
bill was staffing, were those staff laid off? What happened to them in that time? No, they
weren't laid off. It was just that we were never able to guarantee funding for salaries
more than for one month at a time, and it meant that the majority of the efforts of the senior
management team went into raising funds or rather bringing forward funds that had already
been committed by those donors that didn't suspend to try and get those funds brought
forward in donor forecast, which as we know from the UK side is something that isn't
always very easy to do. These things are very closely managed by the Treasury. At the same
time, we had to engage in a concerted effort to provide reassurances to donors who had
suspended their funding that the agency was on the right track, that it was doing everything
that it could do within its means to respond to and address the allegations. So it's fundraising,
but it was also reputation management and risk management in other ways as well. Thank you.
Gordon. Thank you very much. A question for you as well, Sam. I want to ask about the
Israeli ban that's passed through the parliament on UNRWA. If you could give us an assessment
of the impact that ban is going to have on your staff, as Monica was asking about, but
also on the services that you're able to provide to people in need. Yeah, I mean, I'm a member
on both sides. The impact will be absolutely devastating. I mean, there's no one that has
the scale or the scope or the resources or the wherewithal to provide the services that
UNRWA is providing in Gaza right now. We're in many ways doing more than we were doing
before the war. Before the war, we were providing 1.2 million people with food aid. We're now
providing 1.9 million people with food aid. We're assisting hundreds of thousands of people
who are registered in UNRWA shelters. These are shelters that were previously schools
that have been turned into shelters, not just for the purposes of this war, but in response
to previous wars because the reality for children in Gaza for the past 20 years has been a childhood
surrounded by conflict. But the bigger impact in terms of some of the systems and the public,
the services that we provide, and some of those I described earlier in relation to healthcare,
in relation to sanitation, solid waste management, and the broad range of public health services
that really can't be picked up very easily, very quickly by other organisations. We're
not just talking about rechanneling money over to other organisations. These are health
systems and public health systems that have been developed over the course of several decades.
That now is in jeopardy and with that, you're risking an environment where when people are
living in the squalor that they're living in, the risk of infectious diseases re-emerging,
as we saw with polio just a few months ago, is incredibly, incredibly high. For the staff,
it creates major uncertainty as well, not just in Gaza, the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and parts of South Lebanon where if applied to the letter, the Knesset bills could also
suspend UNRWA's ability to operate, but across the entire body of staff for two reasons really.
One is what this means for their issue, the Palestinian issue, and that being taken outside
of agreed political parameters and the frameworks of international law in which we operate in
Gaza but elsewhere, but also in terms of their own immediate futures because in Gaza we've
got 13,000 staff, in the West Bank we've got 3,000 staff out of a body of about 30,000.
If those staff stop working and money has to be withdrawn from the equivalent that we
have of a pension fund, then it places the entire instrument in real jeopardy and it will
also have an impact on donor funding decisions around UNRWA which could make it increasingly
difficult for those staff to continue their functions.
Are there any steps that you can take to mitigate it? It sounds like it's obviously incredibly
difficult but I just wondered if you could give us an overview of what UNRWA has done
since this was passed? Yeah, I mean we are advocating in the first
instance. I mean UNRWA is an organ of the United Nations General Assembly so any changes
to its mandate should come through that vehicle. We're advocating at the highest levels with
the General Assembly through our governing organ. We are advocating with member states
to exert the influence that they have on the government of Israel to not implement the bill.
We are working with, as we continue to work with other UN organisations to understand what
the impacts of any changes to UNRWA's ability to operate would be but we're not in a position
right now to engage in detailed contingency planning really because if we were to do that
it could be seen as facilitating a decision which runs contrary to the principles of the
United Nations and the UN Charter but also secondly because the types of services that
UNRWA provides while some such as delivery of food aid could in theory be picked up by
others. The systems that we're running, the education system that we're running, the health
system that we're running, the solid waste management systems, they're not things that
can be handed over in a space of 90 days. And that's something which has been perplexing
me because an occupying country has a duty to civilians to provide basic services which
really UNRWA has been providing. So have Israeli politicians been debating how they will be
able to deliver those legal services? Not as far as I'm aware but it has been made clear
to the Government of Israel including recently by the Secretary General of the United Nations
that it would be Israel's responsibility to provide those services in accordance with
international law and the responsibilities upon an occupying power. But we're not seeing
any moves in that direction at least not so far. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. So we
are picking up from there and actually to Rohan and also Naval as well. To what extent can
your organisations actually work to fill the void that we're getting a sense of there?
It would be impossible. Not just for obviously organisations like Medical Aid for Palestinians
but it's, you know, the clear position across, you know, the humanitarian sector that we
as a collective will not be able to fill that gap. There's two issues here. One that UNRWA
is the backbone of the humanitarian system in Gaza both in terms of its logistics, you
know, provision of things like fuel that we depend on in order to run our operations and
various support there. But the closure of UNRWA's clinics would be far beyond our capacity to
meet and far beyond the capacity of any other agency to meet or the collective of those
agencies. It would create, I mean, it's already a humanitarian catastrophe but it would be
total system collapse. And so I don't, I think, you know, as Sam has just said, I think we
need to be very careful about focusing our minds on contingency planning. Obviously,
you know, we always need to keep all possibilities under review. But our first and primary priority
needs to be to protect UNRWA and to make sure that it is not dismantled in any format because
there is no viable contingency in the immediate future or the long term future that would
meet the needs of the people that it serves. And Nobelle, did you have?
Absolutely, at the Palestinian regressions have the same position. So no local or international
party could fulfill the gap that UNRWA would have. No one had the infrastructure or the
means to do that. So absolutely banning UNRWA would have catastrophic consequences on the
civilians and the humanitarian response in the Gaza Strip. This also like not only like
including the entry of aid into Gaza, including also like fuel essentials to EMS and health
services, much of which relies on logistics and tracking and managed by UNRWA. This will
also even affect the entire humanitarian response as UNRWA is the backbone.
Thanks very much, Sam. I just had a follow up question to you, UNRWA is doing essential
work in Gaza and it's welcome that the UK government has restored funding. I wonder
if you could briefly outline though in relation to the Kelowna report, the reforms and changes
that you've seen UNRWA implement specifically around vetting of staff.
Yeah, I mean we share the names of all our staff with all host authorities, including
the government of Israel who aren't a host, but with whom we share them. We've been doing
that for the past 15 years. We do it twice a year. We continue to do that. We continue
to share the coordinates of all our locations and facilities with the Israeli government
on a daily basis as well. And as you may know until the 27th of January, whatever it was
of this year, end of January this year, not once had we received any response from the
Israeli authorities in relation to that list of names that had been provided. Now, since
the Kelowna report has been issued and that report did speak to the high standards and
the systems, the robust systems, I think the most robust system amongst any UN agency that
exists, we have taken additional measures and additional steps really just to get on
top and remain on top what remains a very fluid, a very difficult, a very politicised
and fragile environment inside Gaza and in other fields of operation. And we put in place
a number of measures to provide more systematic, more regular quarterly briefings to our key
donors on what it is that we're doing, the reality of the situation on the ground so
that we can keep apprised and keep on top of what is happening, any changes to the environment.
We've hired and are in the process of setting up a risk management unit within the organisation.
It's something that we'd wanted to do for several years but just wasn't possible because
of a lack of resources. So, a number of senior staff have been brought in to actually provide
some focused effort to that initiative, which even if we get through this will remain something
that we have to keep on top of for the past, for the coming years. We're not...
If you want to get more on record, do you want to write to us on that? It's just I'm
very minded we've got an awful lot of questions. Alas.
Just a question, obviously very clearly the message is that there isn't an alternative.
In terms of some of the services provided. What is the timeline? You mentioned the UN
General Assembly being a body under that. What is the timeline in your optimism, I guess,
around any change and about not going ahead? If you hear government was going to put pressure
on at certain points, is there more that you would like the government to be doing right now?
Yeah, I mean, the bills were passed on the 28th of October with a 90 day timeframe for implementation.
And also, I believe a requirement that whatever committee report back on progress every six
months in relation to their implementation. We then... or we didn't, a letter was sent
to the Schefter Cabernet of the United Nations about 10 days ago basically saying that the
laws were now coming into effect and essentially that the clock had started ticking. I mean,
as we've seen with the 30 day notice period the Americans gave for the improvements in
the importation of aid. We don't know precisely when this will come into effect precisely
down to the day, but we're planning on essentially 80 days from now. Now what that means precisely
given the lack of specificity in the letters. I mean, we're literally talking about a couple
of sentences is what we have received in terms of details remains to be seen. So we're pushing
on member states through entities like this just to highlight the impact of it, the criticality
of it, the lack of all the obligations of member states in relation to meeting the findings
of the ICJ ruling earlier this year and the obligations on Israel to facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian aid and that a decision to dismantle UNRWA would completely go against
that. We call on the UK government and other member states to do what they can with the
political capital, the advocacy of lobbying that they have both directly but also through
the Security Council and through any influence that you have with other member states. Thank
you. Brian in please. Thank you. I've got some questions on health care facilities,
but before we move on to that, I wonder Sam if you could tell us a little bit about basic
water supply and how that is dealt with. Are you dealing with desalination? Are you dealing
with water that's pumped from Israel? How is water getting to the people? Sam, can I
ask for a very brief answer please? Yeah, I mean, water was difficult before the war.
Water comes into Gaza in really three ways or water is available in three ways. There
are three Israeli lines that come in. There are desalination plants and there are water
wells, including many, that the UNRWA operates. The desalination plant has at times been unable
to operate due to lack of fuel, due to lack of supplies. My understanding right now is
that the main desalination plant in Dera Bella in central Gaza is functioning. Water wells,
our ability to function is dependent on access and fuel and supplies as well. So we have
six, I believe, water wells in Jabalia camp. None of those have been operating now for
several weeks because lack of fuel, because lack of ability to reach them. Now the Mecarot
lines are three lines from Israel. Israel has said a lot about restoring those lines
at different points in time, but even when those lines are restored, if the infrastructure
itself is damaged through the intensity of the conflict and the municipal staff haven't
been able to reach to repair it, which they haven't and on many occasions have been killed
whilst trying to carry out their duties, the fact that the lines are open does not mean
that people are able to meet their needs for water, particularly in an environment where
almost everyone is displaced. And water, as anywhere in Gaza, is set up to provide for
people where they are. If you've got hundreds of thousands of people in displacement camps
on the beach, there isn't the water infrastructure there to support them. So it has to be trucks
and it has to be brought in. Sorry to labour the point, but it's quite an important one.
How do people collect the water then? Do they go with small buckets or with small buckets?
Yeah, I mean your life as a child right now starts in Gaza walking along with your yellow
jerrycan or your yellow bucket queuing up on the side of a road where a water truck comes
past and you even see kind of rows of hundreds of jerrycans just laid up all in very kind
of neat, neat order as people. That's one of their daily ones. Thank you for painting that
picture. Sorry. So to Rohan, could you outline the current state of healthcare facilities
across Gaza? Yeah, of course. So just to go back to January, at that point we were warning
about the systematic dismantling of the healthcare system that has continued unabated. In terms
of hospitals, there are now no fully functioning hospitals left in Gaza. There are 17 out of
I'll get onto Kamal Adwan in a minute, but that from a sort of a medium size hospital
now has two pediatricians and one general practitioner treating a patient load of 120
plus casualties coming in. So that's what a partially functioning hospital might be.
There are currently 14,000 patients in need of medical evacuation. That's only the most
critical cases that it evades the point of the many who would normally be traveling to
East Jerusalem and other places for, for example, cancer treatment or other treatments, as they
would have done before October last year. The civil defense and ambulance services,
I'm sure Nabeel can speak to this point as well, are hugely restricted both in terms
of their operating environment and their ability to reach people, but particularly up in the
North, the civil defense in, in North Gaza is essentially suspended all operations, both
because they don't have fuel, but they also don't have security. They can't run their
ambulances. They can't reach people because of insecurity. So the health system is in a
state of steady collapse. It is most intensive that collapse in the North at the moment where
there are three hospitals on very minimal functioning because there is no aid reaching
them, no medical supplies. They have several of them have had large proportions of their,
of their staff forced to flee the hospitals to go South or as you've heard earlier, have
either been arrested, detained or killed. Thank you. Sam, what's been the longterm impact
of people going without their medicine and routine treatment? Yeah, I mean, more people
will die, more people will suffer, more children will grow up unable to meet their potential
in terms of contributing society. So it has devastating impacts on individual levels,
family levels, but also on the impact, on the level of the society as, as, as a whole.
I mean, we heard earlier as well as the 43,000 people that had been killed and over 100,000
injured, there are many that are just going without in terms of routine care, routine treatment.
This includes, you know, elderly or middle-aged who've got, you know, sedentary diseases,
diabetes, hypertension, things like that, cancer treatments, as well as people who've
fallen sick as a result of the conflict who aren't able to get the care that they need.
So the children who, who develop paralysis as a result of polio, polio can't be cured.
But if you get to a hospital and you get some treatment, you can, you know, you can, you
know, palliative and so, you know, it can help you deal with some of the worst impacts of
it. But all of that really has been, is, is gone or is going. And you've also got a medical
workforce that themselves have gone through, you know, unbelievable trauma and are also
suffering. So their ability to tend to the needs of the people of what, which they do,
I mean, remarkably above and beyond anything we've ever seen in recent memory, but their
ability to continue providing that care as well is, is massively, massively constrained.
Amina, we can see you trying to get in and I think Brian's got questions for you as well.
I was going to go to you next, Amina. We've heard so many stories today. In your opinion,
do Israeli attacks on Ghazan hospitals violate international law?
And is that a question for me? Yes. Yes, please. Human Rights Watch has reported
that attacks on healthcare facilities, including medical transportation in Gaza, the Israeli
army has been unlawful. And what I wanted to chime in on are the few questions that were
already raised in terms of long-term impacts of the lack of access to healthcare, as well
as the immediate impact. So for my report, for example, I interviewed Lajan, who is a
immediate and urgent and adequate healthcare. By the time she reached Egypt where she was
evacuated for healthcare, her wounds became so gangrenous that she had to have her leg
amputated. So here we are talking about a child who didn't lose a limb in a traumatic
amputation but lost a limb because it took days for her to access medical care. In terms
of long-term impacts, the report that I recently put out documents that children with disabilities
and chronic health conditions who used to receive medical, regular medical treatment
prior to October 7th and have not been able to receive it since then, have faced serious
health consequences. Just to give you another illustration that stayed with me since I heard
about it, think about babies born with clubfoot condition. Clubfoot is a condition that's
treatable in any place in the world that has a functioning healthcare system. But Dr. Anna
Gelani, who is an orthopedic surgeon, she told me that when she was in Gaza, she saw four
babies who were broke to her who had a clubfoot condition. And she told me these babies are
going to grow up having a disability. And the only reason why is because the only facility
in Gaza that was able to provide testing and racing for babies born with clubfoot has been
demolished and closed. And the only person who was trained to test babies with clubfoot
condition has been killed. And so what we will see as doctors told me over and over
again for the report that I worked on is that children with disabilities will either die
or their disabilities will become more complex because they don't have access to healthcare.
Thank you. Sam, can I bring you in? Sure. Thank you. We heard earlier about the lack
of medical aid and basic medical equipment getting in. My question is to Nobel. Since
you appeared before the committee in January, has the situation with regards to border checks
improved? Unfortunately, since January, the situation is only getting worse. In May, the
Rafah crossing has been closed and this has affected the entry of humanitarian aid. Israel
is still obstructing the entry of humanitarian aid before May, the Palestinian Red Crescent
managed to receive thousands of aid trucks. Despite it was the minimum, it is not enough.
But I can tell you, since May, until this moment, we only received 65 aid trucks through
other crossing points because Rafah crossing is still closed. And instead of increasing
the entry of humanitarian aid, we're getting less aid that is getting in through all the
crossing points that are currently open. And that's why the humanitarian situation is only
deteriorating. And the healthcare system is also continue to collapse because all hospitals
in Gaza are lacking medications, medical supplies, and even if you, which is urgently needed
for the power generators, as the Palestinian Red Crescent, many of our ambulances had to
stop operating many times because of the fuel depression. We also suffer as other healthcare
providers in our hospitals and our medical points across the Gaza strip. We suffer because
of the shortages of medications and medical supplies. And this is a real problem. While
the war is only getting intense, and we are in need for more humanitarian aid, this includes
fuel, relief items in addition to medications, the aid is still getting in a very minimum
basis, which is not even scratching the surface of the needs. And that's why the Palestinian
Red Crescent also continue to recall for safe, sustained, unembedded humanitarian aid access
to all areas of Gaza. We do not need a 20 or 30 trucks to enter per day. We need enough
aid to get in. And this should be getting in without any limitations, without restrictions,
and to be able to deliver to all the people across the Gaza strip, including the people
who are currently trapped in north of Gaza. For over 40 days, the people in north of Gaza
have not been able to receive any aid. This means no food, no water, no medications, and
nothing. And the situation is unimaginable. I can't even describe the situation for civilians
in north of Gaza. I can tell you as the Palestinian Red Crescent, currently there is not even
a single ambulance that is operating in the besieged area in northern Gaza. And this means
Jabal al-Yarif refugee camp, Beit Lahya and Beit Hanon. However, the Palestinian Red Crescent,
we are operating in north of Gaza, but not in the besieged area. We work in the southern
parts of the northern governance. So we have very restricted access. We can't reach any
of the besieged areas. And unfortunately, despite getting calls from people who are
appealing to us to send an ambulance, we feel helpless because these areas are considered
as red zones by the Israeli and we are completely denied access to it. Any ambulance to try
to reach will be targeted. And this means people bleed to death. And this literally
means a bleed to death without being able to receive emergency medical care. And those
who are lucky enough to be transported even by donkey carts to be sent to the hospital,
they are sent to one of the three remained hospitals who are in catastrophic conditions.
And currently we are organizing evacuation missions in coordination with the WHO and
the ICRC from time to time to evacuate the patients from north of Gaza to other hospitals
who are still operating in Gaza City. I would like here to add one point, which is necessary
to our session today. The session question is like, how bad is the situation in terms
of the health care? The situation is beyond catastrophic, is unimaginable, and it will
continue to stay bad because of the unimaginable attacks that is happening in unprecedented
scale. It never happened because we are seeing more hospitals being taken out of service.
The Palestine Radical Center runs only two hospitals and both of them were taken out
of service. Al-Quds Hospital in Gaza City was taken out of service at the beginning
of the war after it was besieged, attacked, forcing everyone to evacuate the hospital,
including the medical staff and patients. Later it was burned out and now the hospital,
everything inside it is damaged. So even if the war end, we will need a good time to be
able to reoperate the hospital again. The second hospital for the Palestine Radical
Center, Al-Amal Hospital, which is in the south of Gaza, was also attacked repeatedly, besieged,
and then raided by the Israeli forces where they arrested a number of our medical staff
and volunteers. And later, for the hospital to be evacuated, damaged the hospital and
gladly we managed to reoperate the hospital again so it can provide its health care services
for the people in the south, taken into consideration that Al-Amal Hospital in the south is one of
the major hospitals. The situation in the south, as you know, the majority of population
were forced to flee towards the south and there is a lack of health care services being
provided, especially for people with chronic diseases, pregnant women and other cases because
primary hospitals can barely provide life-saving services for wounded who are trauma patients
because of the bombardment and that means pregnant women, children who are sick have
infectious diseases and other cases, they go out without any services. And this is what
we try to provide through our hospital and we manage to establish other 25 medical points
across the Gulf Strip to provide essential health care services to the community. I have
lost 19 PRCS members and all of them were killed in line of duty.
Nabil, thank you so much, you have really painted very very clearly what the situation
is and can I say thank you to you, to your staff and to all the volunteers in the Palestinian
Red Crescent. The work you have done has been truly remarkable and may I also pay tribute
to your colleagues who have been killed trying to do their duty to the people that they are
trying to serve and support. The committee went out to Al Arish and we met your counterparts,
the Egyptian Red Crescent and so we saw first-hand the frustrations that were put in place on
the border control and my admiration for your organisation and theirs knows no bounds. But
could I just clarify one point that you said, you said that 65 trucks have just got in.
Today was the deadline set by the US Secretary of State, Anthony Blinken, to the Israeli
government to return to just 350 and I think when we spoke in January we were looking at
can you tell me, are you seeing any indication based on that deadline set by the US Government
that aid is going to get in now? Unfortunately, based on figures from last months, we are
only receiving less aid than the previous month and as for the north of Gaza, nothing managed
to get in. We hope to witness a real increase in the entry of humanitarian aid. As I said,
we really need safe and sustained entry of humanitarian aid to be able to deliver this
essential aid to all the peoples of Gaza and we also need protection for hospitals. The
situation will continue to be worsened if no serious action is to be taken. Our call
for the international community is to take serious measures to protect hospitals and
medical personnel. No hospital should be attacked and as I said, I have lost 19 PRCS members,
all of them were killed in line of duty when they were trying to save others people's
life. This should never happened. Paramedics should be respected and protected and allowed
to do their job safely while they are trying to do others. But unfortunately, my colleagues
have to say goodbye for their families every single day, not knowing if they are going
to meet them at the end of their shifts because of the great dangers they endured every single
minute when they are trying to save other people's life. I cannot even begin to imagine what
that must feel like and I'm just incredibly grateful to your colleagues for trying to
get up every morning and do the best by the civilians that they're trying to serve. I
want to bring in Rohan and then hand back to Sam if I may. Just because you raised the
US letter from Blinken and Austin, which I think is important to deadline, was today.
I just wanted to draw the committee's attention to an independent scorecard by humanitarian
agencies that was released just today that includes the ANRC, Oxfam, Save the Children
and others. Essentially, they broke down the demands that were made of Israel into a number
of criteria and analysed essentially over the last 30 days. Have any of those been met?
Not a single one has been fully implemented. I think two have been partially implemented.
So the demands are 350 trucks to be entering per day. Actually, over this last 30 days,
we've seen some of the lowest number of trucks entering Gaza during the entire year, 42 per
day on average, as compared to 500 before the beginning of the conflict, some days as
few as six. Humanitarian pauses to enable aid not implemented. Improving security for
humanitarian operations not implemented. 50 to 100 commercial trucks to be allowed to
enter not implemented. ICRC access to detainees that we've heard about, including medical
staff, not implemented. Ending the isolation of North Gaza. Clearly not implemented and
getting much worse. So I just want to say that across the board on every indicator,
Israel is not complying with what is being demanded of it by the US. And also we have
our own scorecard. I'm happy to share that with committee. We have our own scorecard with
regards to the implementation of the ICJ's, the International Court of Justice's provisional
measures in January, March and May to prevent genocide. Again, across the board, every single
provisional measure has not been implemented. So as Nabil has just mentioned, our message
is that a strategy focusing on aid but without accountability, without some form of countermeasure,
to address the fact that Israel is not acting in good faith with regards to its obligations
as an occupying power, that strategy has failed. We need a rethink on the way that those interactions
and those relations with Israel function if we are to see any form of meaningful aid response
in Gaza and prevent further catastrophe. Thank you very much. Sam. I would be grateful just
to ask one more question. And chair, let me know if this is beyond the remit of this discussion.
But there's been clear evidence presented today of what I would say constitutes breaches
of international law, including targeting the symbol of the red crescent and blocking aid.
I'd be interested to know what sort of evidence gathering is taking place, because at some
point there will need to be accountability and justice, and whether there is any active
operation to start to look at which individuals are committing which acts. Can I ask Amina
to answer that, please? Thank you so much. I mean, already, the first
report on the situation of people with disabilities in Gaza, where we clearly said that Israeli
evacuation orders are not taking into account the needs of people with disabilities who
cannot evacuate, and that they are actually putting them at higher risk of death than
they are. I interviewed dozens of people with disabilities and children, including a 14-year-old
girl who had to beg her parents to leave her behind because she felt that she was a burden
on them as they tried to carry her down to the south, because she had cerebral palsy.
She lost her assistant devices in an attack on her home. And then literally two days after
she lost her assistant devices, Israel ordered everyone to evacuate from the north to the
south. And one of her partners actually in Gaza, who was a 39-year-old man who was blind,
ended up being killed because he could not evacuate. And this Thursday, so in two days,
Human Rights Watch is releasing a report on displacement and humanitarian destruction
in Gaza, a definitive finding of far crimes and crimes against humanity. And as part of
this report, we also document that the Israeli destruction of the infrastructure, including
the healthcare system, including through sometimes reckless but often intentional attacks on hospitals,
that this is all building and providing mounting evidence that Israeli authorities have no
intention to allow people to return to their homes. So this report is coming out on Thursday.
And over the last year, we have reported also, I do want to come back to Professor Mamado,
he did speak about the mental health harm caused to health care workers in Gaza. And
our report on the tension of health care workers, where we did document that Israeli military
originally detained health care workers in Gaza. And the healthcare workers that we spoke
with told us about the mental health harm and trauma that they have been through, that
even though they have gone back to work, they continue to be traumatized. And specifically
to also just add, because what was really important, what Nabal said about the restrictions
we went through in '08, but what we don't hear as much about is the specific restriction
that Israeli authorities have imposed on particularly harming children and adults with disabilities.
And it is the restrictions that Israeli authorities have imposed on so-called dual-use items.
These items are civilian items. We are talking about eyeglasses, wheelchair, wallets. That
Israel claims cannot enter Gaza because of security reasons. Israel claims that these
items can be used in military purposes. And in fact, what we have heard from the foreign
office is that even the aid provided by the UK government, the aid that the UK government
is trying to provide to Palestinians in Gaza, the warehouse is filled up with wheelchairs
that cannot enter because of these specific restrictions. And because people with disabilities
will not have access to assistive devices that are essential. They are at high risk of dying
because it's harder for them to flee. They are at high risk of infections because it's
harder for them to access talking about water, something that Sam spoke about earlier. It
is difficult for anyone in Gaza to access water. Just imagine how it's more difficult
for people with disabilities and specifically if they don't have access to assistive devices.
But then also what we have documented when it comes to children is that because they
don't have access to assistive devices, such as, for example, a medical boot or a walker
or a wheelchair, and then coupled with lack of access to health care, their conditions
have worsened. So just to say that there's lots of evidence already out there. And Human
Rights Watch has been calling and continues to call on the UK to take more concrete steps
in condemning the war and condemning the violations of international humanitarian law and take
persuasive efforts to press Israel to comply with international humanitarian law. Something
that I would also like to speak about, whether now or later, but there are things that can
be done. Just briefly, earlier there was a question about-
Amina, if we can do that later, that would be great. And maybe if you could write to
the committee on those recommendations, we'd be very grateful to hear. I'm going to say
to everybody, we still have more questions. We still want to hear from you, but I am going
to have to ask people to speed up their answers. But Nabaal, you wanted to come back in?
I really want to stress out the importance of the protection. And there was a question
regarding the violating the international humanitarian law. Unfortunately, we have lost
despite we have very horrific conditions where our paramedics were attacked, despite being
part of coordinated missions. And coordinated missions mean there is a deliberate target,
because Israeli authorities are very well known of the ambulance as a plate number,
of the staff names, their ID numbers, and despite this coordination, which was taken to ensure
the safety of the staff, they deliberately target our staff. And here I can't go without
recalling the story of both of my colleagues, Youssef Zaino and Ahmed Elmadoun, who were
killed when they were trying to rescue the six years old Hind Rajah. This happened on
January 29, when Hind Rajah was in her family car with her relatives trying to evacuate
Gaza City. Israeli forces opened fire at the family, killed everyone except Hind and her
cousin. She was 15 years old, Leyan. Leyan was over the phone with our dispatcher. She
was screaming. They are firing at us, and she was shot while she was over the phone
with the Palestine Red Crescent dispatcher. We called the same number again, and Hind
picked up the phone, and we had the most devastating, heartbreaking, the longest call in the history
of the Palestine Red Crescent. For three hours, this little girl was begging our dispatcher
to send her an ambulance, to send someone to save her. She was terrified, screaming,
empowering, hearing the sound of gunshots all the time, saying, "The tanks are close to
me," and at the same time, surrounded by the dead bodies of her family. For three hours,
she was only asking for help, and unfortunately, we could not send someone to save her right
away. We had to coordinate safe access for our staff. It took us three hours to coordinate
the safe access, and unfortunately, after that, when the ambulance was dispatched, it
turns out that the ambulance was bombed upon its arrival, and guess what? It took us 12
days of uncertainty, not knowing of our colleague Yusef and Ahmed managed to rescue Hind or
not, and then after the withdrawal of Israeli forces, we learned that the ambulance was bombed,
and our paramedics were mirrors away from hand guards. How come a story like that to
pass without anything, without even accountability? I can't even imagine that the families of
both Yusef and Ahmed, every single day, they are still grieving their loss, and I can't
imagine the pain they endure every single day. They didn't even get the chance to say goodbye
for them because remains of their bodies were collected from the ambulance, and Yusef has
five children. Two of them are twins. They are little girls, two years old. Up to this
moment, when they hear the siren of ambulance, they think their dad came back. It's just
a shame in our humanity and a shame on the international community that medical personnel
lose their life while they are trying to save others. It's not a single incident. We have
another story where also, my colleague, Mohammed El Omary, was killed while trying to evacuate
patients from Gaza hospitals to the south. It was a coordinated mission by the ICRC.
It took us one week to coordinate the mission, and after they managed to evacuate patients
from an helicopter hospital, Israeli forces opened fire at a convoy of the ambulances,
killing my colleague, Mohammed El Omary, and injured others while inside the ambulance
was patients who are children. Children who are patients need to be evacuated to the south,
endangering the life of patients, killing medical staff despite coordination. This will continue
to happen since there is no serious consequences taken. My colleague, Hidayah, she is the manager
of Youth and Volunteers Department. She was at Al Amal Hospital in Khan Younes at a time
when it was besieged. The hospital was attacked. There were injuries. She rushed to save one
of the injuries, and a sniper shot her and killed her, and the bullet came in through
this red crescent emblem, which should have provided her protection. I have spoken to
my colleague, Amir. Amir, he's a volunteer, and he was grieving, grieving in pain the loss
of Hidayah, and he told me, "I can't imagine we lost Hidayah. She's like my mom, and I
can't imagine that the bullet just came in through her vest, her red crescent, and killed
her. I can't imagine how after the incident there were, I'm going to have dissemination
and IHL session for the new volunteers, teaching them about the red cross and red crescent
emblem, which should provide them protection." Unfortunately, months later, Amir also was
killed, shot by a sniper, while he was inside Al Amal Hospital.
Naval, I am personally ashamed that the international community has not done more to stop the horror
that you're describing, and any attack on an aid worker is a disgusting, despicable,
wicked thing, and there are laws in place, and they need to be honoured by everybody,
and I am truly sorry for the loss of your colleagues, and I am truly grateful that you have shared
their stories so that their deaths are able to be recognised, honoured, and I hope are
able to help us prevent what's going on. Thank you very much for sharing that. I want to—Rohan,
you wanted to come in? I'm really sorry, everybody. We do want to hear what you're saying. I know
that we're going to run out of time, so I will ask all of you if you want to write to
us. I know it's not the same, but we do want to hear everything that you're saying. We
do want to document it and we do want it to make a difference, but I am very aware that
we're pushing up against time now, so if I could ask people to make statements wherever
they can, I'd be very, very grateful. Rohan? Thank you. I wanted to address the point head-on.
One of the provisional measures ordered by the International Court of Justice to prevent
genocide was that the State of Israel should take effective measures to prevent the destruction
and ensure the preservation of evidence related to allegations of acts within the scope of
the Genocide Convention. No forensic specialists have been able to enter. No independent human
rights experts have been able to enter. No international media have been able to enter,
etc. To be perfectly honest, humanitarian agencies feel that there's a sort of Damocles hanging
over us if we speak out too strongly on issues of accountability, though they are so essential
for the protection of the people that we serve. I do want to register, however, that has been
based on expert testimony and open source information, at least one major investigation
by an independent UN commission of inquiry set up by the Human Rights Council, which
found just over a month ago that Israel has implemented a concerted policy to destroy
the health care system of Gaza. Israeli security forces have deliberately killed, wounded,
arrested, detained, mistreated, and tortured medical personnel and targeted medical vehicles,
constituting the war crime of willful killing and mistreatment and the crime against humanity
of extermination. Israeli authorities carried out such acts while tightening the siege of
Gaza Strip in the context of collective punishment of the Palestinian population of Gaza. Israel
has already committed war crimes and the crime against humanity of extermination. Extermination
under the Rome Statute is the killing of persons including by inflicting conditions of life
calculated to bring about the destruction of part of the population. It is our assessment
that this is a war on Palestinians, that the humanitarian crisis is not some accidental
byproduct but across the board. As you heard from doctors there, from foreign agencies,
from Palestinians themselves, you ask any independent observer or any person on the
ground, they will tell you that this is a situation of mass atrocities and therefore
the approach that the government takes simply cannot be based purely on aid alone. What
is the point of providing funding for UNRWA if Israel is going to dismantle UNRWA services?
What is the point of providing aid that comes into Al-Ariish and you see it packing up at
the border if it is not allowed to enter, if it does enter then there is no security
so it cannot be distributed, there is no warehousing, there is no fuel, it is besieged from the
north of Gaza. Our colleagues tell us every single day that it is hell and what I am really
worried about is my colleagues when I ask them what do you want me to say in front of
these people, they say "don't bother, don't bother, it doesn't matter anymore, we are
waiting to die". Thank you. Thank you. Alice? Thanks very much
for very powerful testimony. Just moving on to the issue of hunger, malnutrition and famine.
Sam, just to kind of, I guess a factual question, has the availability of food improved since
you were speaking to the committee in January? No, I spoke to the committee in November I
think but no, the situation in terms of availability of food in Gaza is, I mean I left last Thursday,
is back to what it was in last November in terms of the non-functioning of the private
sector. The lack of humanitarian supplies as many other witnesses have already said
in relation to the number of trucks going in which is a bad metric but it is the metric
that we are using but also in relation to the siege of northern Gaza where no supplies
have gone in now for over a month where the little reserves that were available at the
time the siege was put into effect have all dwindled away into nothing. And the ability
for bakeries and other food producers in Gaza to operate is also massively, massively constrained.
Thank you, moving on to Amina. We have been talking for a long time about famine looming,
and you know starvation looming large. There is still a high risk of famine. At what point
is starvation deemed a weapon of war under international law? And do you think that is
what is happening right now? We have reported and documented that in the
world is using starvation as a weapon of war against Palestinians in Gaza. And particularly,
with the perspective of children with disabilities who are in general at higher risk of malnourishment,
many of those children who have died had a disability. And what we have documented and
reported on is that even with the trickle of aid that has been going in, the food items
needed by children with disabilities and adults with disabilities did not come in. The special
food items did not come in. And over and again, Human Rights Watch has been reporting that
Israel is using starvation as a weapon of war as a collective punishment of the Palestinian
people by cutting off electricity, water, food, medical supplies. And I do want to emphasize
something that Rohan mentioned earlier, the Commission of Inquiry. But we should also
recognize that the UK government has concluded that there is a clear risk that UK components
could be used by Israel to facilitate or to commit serious violation of fire chal. And
because of that, the UK government has suspended the F-35 pounds from going directly to Israel.
So even the UK government has recognized that, directly, indirectly, that Israel is committing
serious violations of international humanitarian law. And it is something to keep in mind and
to take tangible actions to press Israel to, well, to press for accountability and justice.
And if I can, I don't think it's time for now just to provide some concrete asks of
what the UK could be doing going forward. Very briefly, please, Amina.
So a few things. One is to suspend all arms and military assistance to Israel, including
arms that could go to Israel either directly via the US or other third countries. We are
calling on the UK to impose targeted sanctions against Israeli government officials who are
responsible for violations. It's important for the UK to undertake a comprehensive review
of its trade, military, security, and diplomatic relations with Israel, including by the current
UK-Israel trade partnership agreement and to not enter into any trade agreement with
Israel as long as Israeli authorities are committing serious violations of international
human rights and international humanitarian law. We're calling on the UK to ban trade
with illegal settlements in the Arab-Arabic Palestinian territories. And talking about
the banning of UNRWA, something to create that the UK can do is to join Norway, which
Norway is currently seeking resolution by the UN General Assembly to ask for a binding
and expedited ICJ advisory opinion on the banning of UNRWA. And it would be really great to see
the UK join Norway in this effort. And just to say that something that I have not had
the chance to speak about today, but Israel is not only controlling what can enter Gaza,
but has imposed severe restriction on who can leave Gaza. UNICEF has said that it will
take seven years for the 2,500 children who need urgent medical care to be evacuated and
to get treatment outside. And we are calling on the UK to press in to ensure that children
and adults in need of medical treatment can, indeed, evacuate and medical treatment that
they cannot get in Gaza. And we are calling on the UK government, as other governments
who have sophisticated healthcare system, to accept patients from Gaza and to work together
with Palestinian and Israeli authorities to also ensure their right to return. And finally,
in all public communication, I ask you to raise the alarm on the specific harms caused
to children with disabilities. I've been doing this work for a year now and have been documented
and am still in touch with all the children and families that I have interviewed. And the
situation is getting more catastrophic more day by day. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Laura? Thank you. We've heard a bit about the challenges that pregnant women experience
getting any support whatsoever. But could I ask Nibale in the first instance to talk
a bit more about the impact of this conflict on women specifically? Well, the impact of
this ongoing war on women is truly indescribable. We're talking about women being killed first
as according to the figures thousands of women were killed. They have lost also their children
and many thousand women became alone. So they have now to be the father to take care of
their children, to get the everyday struggle, which is to get little food for the children
and to also bring water. Many women, they go hungry without eating to save the food
for their families. Almost 60,000 pregnant women in Gaza are lacking everything. They
are malnourished not being able to receive the food they need, not even the food they
need, not even receiving the proper healthcare service they deserve. They are living in shelters.
Thousands of people are sharing one toilet and you can't even imagine or relate how a
pregnant woman have to endure in such inhuman conditions being displaced and not only once.
Many women have been forced to flee multiple times. An average family had to flee three
or four or even five times. So these pregnant women are enduring very difficult conditions
where first, there is ongoing bombardments. They have lost their family members and their
loved ones. Many of them, they have lost their homes as it was already bombarded. They had
forced to flee multiple times and here when we talk about evacuating, most of the time
the evacuation process is on foot. You have to walk very long distances on foot. While
rubble is everywhere, there is no transportation and they're very horrific and hard conditions
to arrive any area and then to find the shelter, which is usually when we say shelter, there
is no shelters. It's just a school that it turns into a places where people can stay,
but there is no services. It's just a place where you can sleep in and then as I said,
those daily struggles even for a woman being in a tent, we have witnessed an increased
number of infectious diseases being spreading among the internally displaced communities.
This includes women and children as well and unfortunately, because of the collapsing healthcare,
the system being a pregnant woman, you barely have the luxury to deliver your baby in a
hospital if you were lucky enough and if this happened, this means it's going to be almost
in and out where even the woman will not have the opportunity to stay at the hospital which
is already over crowded with many patients and sadly, tragically, many women have even
said C-sections without anesthesia because it was like running out and it's one of the
continuous struggles where hospitals lacking anesthesia, painkillers and other basic medications
and medical supplies. Thank you and Rohan, I think you've spoken
to the committee previously about neonatal intensive care services being out of action.
Has anything changed? What support is there? It's deteriorated further, I'm afraid to say.
One of the last remaining neonatal intensive care units that was supported by MAPA for a
long period of time, including during this crisis, was the Kamal Adwan Hospital, which
as you've heard is one of those hospitals that is now in the besieged north. The intensive
care unit was essentially shut down because it wasn't possible to protect those babies
now. They were at the very early stages of the intensified besiegement of North Gatlin,
and then evacuated down to the Patients Friends Benevolent Society Hospital in Gaza City,
which again is supported by MAPA. We've done what we can to establish a sort of a gerry-rigged
pediatric intensive care unit to care for those babies and others, but across the board,
I'm afraid to say that those services are simply not available in the way that they
need to be and at the scale that they need to be to save the lives of the youngest and
most vulnerable members of Gaza society.
>> I know we've heard quite a bit already about the potential long-term impacts on people
with disabilities, and particularly children with disabilities, and you raise potential
long-term serious health consequences. Are there any other impacts that we should be
mindful on people with disabilities that you'd like to raise?
>> Thank you so much. One thing that I haven't had a chance to mention is that it's really
a vicious cycle, because what we documented is that due to Israel's use of explosive weapons
within densely populated areas, and it's something that of course UNICEF and CFD children have
reported in the past, thousands of children are acquiring disabilities, thousands of children
and adults have been injured, and then they're facing this vicious cycle where more and more
children and adults are acquiring a disability, and at the same time, they are at higher risk
of death and injury because of inability to flee, often due to lack of access to accessible
and effective advance warnings that Israel should provide, the heavy destruction, unsanitary
condition, living in makeshift camps where their basic needs cannot be met. I often think
about, again, the children that I have interviewed who have acquired a disability, and it has
happened through traumatic amputation, and one child, Malik, he went with his mom to
get food coupons in a shopping mall, so civilian infrastructure, and while there, a Israeli
strike hit the shopping mall, and his mom told me that when she regained consciousness,
she was still holding her child's hand, and she started running, but at one point she realized
that her child's hand is white, and when she turned around, she realized that she was just
holding his hand and that Malik was nowhere to be seen, and the reason why I wanted to
bring Malik Snorri here today is because I feel that people have gone used to hearing
that thousands of children have lost limbs in Gaza, but it's like when you come across
a specific child and you understand the impact it has on them and how preventable all of
that is and unnecessary. So that is one thing that I ask you to keep in mind, that it's
not just children with disabilities who had disabilities prior to October 7th, but the
thousands of them who have acquired a disability, and that's why we continue to call on the
UK to suspend all arms exports to Israel, including indirectly through third countries.
Thank you. And lastly, could you just give some examples of how the Israeli border checks,
dual-use checks, are impacting on children with disabilities?
So what we know is that since Israeli military took over the Raffa Crossing, I think not
more than like 237 people or patients have been allowed to leave Gaza. There are severe
restrictions on access to treatment inside of Gaza. I mean, just to briefly mention,
because there was a question about pregnant women, only 12 healthcare facilities in Gaza,
out of 36 hospitals that were functioning prior, are able to provide some kind of healthcare
to pregnant women. And even then we know that women have been rushed out of hospitals really
quickly. Going back, just imagine then if it's also a woman with a disability who is
on top of that pregnant. And just to try to back to the restrictions on what answers Gaza,
but also can leave Gaza. What we are also calling on governments who are working toward
evacuation and who are pressuring Israel to allow patients from leaving Gaza, but also
who are providing and offering beds and treatment in their home countries is to include children
with disabilities. Because they've been left invisible. It's mostly been focused on injured
children, but not children with disabilities. And the main restrictions that we know that
exist is that even when Israeli authorities allow and give a permission for a child to
leave Gaza, the permission is not extended to the immediate caregiver or other children
in the family. And that's problematic because we definitely don't want to allow for any
family separation. A family separation shouldn't be happening because it has its own psychological
impacts on a child. And so, as I mentioned earlier, just think about the numbers that
have been provided by UN agencies. And the fact, I think it was only two weeks ago, the
UNICEF said if Israel continues with their severe restrictions on evacuations, it will
take seven years for children who need urgent medical care to be able to leave.
>> Thank you. David?
>> Thanks, Chair. So just going back to one of the first questions that was asked by Monica
around funding. Obviously, having almost a third of your budget cut by the US pulling
out, what's UNRWA's thinking at the moment in terms of President-elect Trump coming in,
the new administration and whether funding will be recommenced? Or are you just going
to have to do with what you have at the moment?
>> Yeah. I mean, it's an interesting question. One, I'm not really able to talk on not wanting
to involve and engage in domestic politics of a member state. We know what happened under
the previous Trump administration in terms of the withholding of funding from UNRWA and
also unilateral measures that were taken at that time. So we're concerned, we're very
concerned that the current suspension of funding may continue. We hope that it doesn't, but
beyond that, there's not much more that I can say.
>> Have you got a follow-up? I'm looking around. Your evidence today has had a profound impact
on this Committee, as you can see. I'm sure it has also had a profound impact on the people
watching it, and it's our duty to make sure it has had a profound impact on the decision-makers
as well. We may well come back to you for additional evidence or for clarifications,
but on behalf of the whole Committee, can I please say thank you so much for making the
time? I know you have an awful lot of pressures on all of you, not of your own making right
now, and so it has been very, very generous of you to come and speak to us. May I give
my deepest sympathies to all of you that have lost colleagues, that have been directly impacted
by this, and also have been indirectly impacted by trying to support your colleagues through
the most difficult time any of us can imagine. We really, really appreciate that you do get
up every morning and that you do keep on fighting for those civilians who need our support more
than ever before. Thank you all. Thank you, Committee. Order, order. This session is now
closed.
